#### Risk Handling Strategy fall into 4 easy categories available in DHM Risks module:
- Reduction (Take our chances) (also called passive acceptance) we don't care about the risk. If it happens, we'll cope with the effects. This strategy may be appropriate for low-priority threats, and it may also be adopted where it is not possible or cost-effective to address a threat in any other way. Passive acceptance involves no proactive action apart from periodic review of the threat to ensure that it does not change significantly.
- Acceptance (active acceptance) we allocate reserves that can be used for handling the effects of the risk that has already happened. Acceptance can be either active or passive. The most common active acceptance strategy is to establish a contingency reserve, including amounts of time, money, or resources to handle the threat if it occurs.
- Mitigation we make steps to reduce the probability or impact of the risk. It's something to decrease probability or impact, extra action. Adopting less complex processes, conducting more tests, or choosing a more stable vendor are examples of mitigation actions. Mitigation may also involve prototype development. Where it is not possible to reduce probability, a mitigation response might reduce the impact by targeting factors that drive the severity. For example, designing redundancy into a system may reduce the impact from a failure of the original component.
- Transfer we transfer the responsibility and expected negative impact to another party that is better suited to handle it. Risk transfer often involves payment of a risk premium to the party taking on the threat. Transfer can be achieved by a range of actions, which include but are not limited to the use of insurance, performance bonds, warranties, guarantees, etc. Agreements may be used to transfer ownership and liability for specified risks to another party.
- Avoidance risk avoidance is when the project team acts to eliminate the threat or protect the project from its impact. It may be appropriate for high-priority threats with a high probability of occurrence and a large negative impact. Examples of avoidance actions may include removing the cause of a threat, extending the schedule, changing the project strategy, or reducing scope. Some risks can be avoided by clarifying requirements, obtaining information, improving communication, or acquiring expertise. On other words, it's removing the cause of the risk

---

**Step 0:**  
Plan Risk Management Before defining any particular risks, please at least think (and document if possible) how you would deal with risks during the project.  
Who is responsible for monitoring risks, planning and implementing risk responses? it might be Epam, it might be client. How often and who should review risk register? Are you able to subcontract in order to transfer some risks to a third party? Define project risk tolerance / appetite: which constrains are more important for your project?  
For instance, if quality can't be affected in any case, risks on quality would be much more important. By definition, risk appetite is “the amount of risk, on a broad level, an organisation is willing to accept in pursuit of stakeholder value.” ... Frequently, the terms risk appetite and risk tolerance are used interchangeably, although they represent related, but different concepts. Risk appetite is a broadbased description of the desired level of risk that an entity will take in pursuit of its mission. Risk tolerance reflects the acceptable variation in outcomes related to specific performance measures linked to objectives the entity seeks to achieve.”

**Step 1:**  
Find your risks Get some preparations work yourself first. List risks that may block /endanger your project or damage it significantly. For each note: Risk description - examples External dependencies will not be ready at the expected time (requirements not finished, external development delayed, etc.) The sponsor gets frustrated and establishes restrictive processes (micromanagement, daily time reporting, etc)  
For a more structured approach to driving risk discovery sessions, you may take the following steps:

- Go through all the assumptions you have made for the project, and check what happens if they fail. If there's any reason to assume that something will fail, it's a risk.
- Go through all the dependencies in a similar way, if there's a risk that they'll not be fulfilled as requested, it's a risk. Peer into your magic orb - it's the future, and the project has failed.
- What can be the reason? What were the risks you had in your previous projects? Maybe they can happen this time too, consider them for adding. Consult other PMs / DMs, see if they have any useful experiences too (a list of common risks from existing EPAM projects is included in the references). When preparation work is done, get some brainstorm meeting with team ( presale or project ) to get even more risks into Registry. Not likely at this stage you will need more then 30 minutes for it. For describing risks in the registry, a good format can be "if … happens (or does not happen), … will happen (or won't happen)".  
    _For example, "if the key developer gets hit by a bus, nobody will be able to take over his job immediately, and the delivery will be significantly delayed". The benefit of this form is that it grasps both the future issue, and its outcome for the project, which will be important for the next step._

**Step 2:**  
See how important they are After you have a list of risks, you should assess their importance. In DHM you can do it during logging your risks and Risk Exposure will be calculated automatically:

- Risk Probability (Very Low to Very High) )
- Risk Impact (1-5) Then go through the risks in the list, and fill in the info. In order to do it, you should establish a scale first (what is the probability 1? Is it 1%? Is it 10%? What does impact 5 mean? 100% cost overrun? Or is it only 20%?)  
    These percentages are usually project-dependent, The table is used in DHM Risks Module that can be used for any project. Be aware that these are just some numbers to start with, you should definitely tailor them to your needs (especially for the impact - if you have an absolute deadline, even a 1-day delay can have a score of 4 or 5). Use any estimation technique you prefer (Agile planning game, weighted average, etc.). It is better if you can involve your team into this activity too, but it can be more effective to include only key team members, not the entire team ( Dev / Test / BA leads).

**Step 3:**  
Estimate them After Risks Descriptions and Exposure are in Risk Register, you can sort your risk registry by Risk Exposure (descending), and it will give you the priority in which you should care about risks. You can establish your own rule: estimating and defining further strategy for every risk with exposure 2 and above. In an average project, most of the risks mentioned will have low probability or impact, resulting in a low risk score. Normally 2-3 risks will have a high score (above 3, for example), and a few will be moderate (the score is between 0.5-1.5). So what we are estimating when we have already Impact defined? Monetary Impact as an important measure for evaluation and Contingency plan - you may even re-think the impact and probability of specific risks after doing this exercise.

**Step 4:**  
Find out what to do with them Having Monetary Impact and Exposure is a great help for identifying next steps: Treatment strategy - the selected strategy to handle it, see below Risk owner - the team member who will check the trigger, and alert the team if it happens or actively will work on Mitigation /Avoidance plan. Usually, it's the team member who's most closely connected with the risk source. Sometimes risk does not require an owner, especially when your Strategy is acceptance and contingency does not require budgeting/etc. Define secondary risks based on risk responses. What can occur as a threat if you implement a treatment strategy? You can use a Decision tree as a tool.

**Step 5:**  
Set the process in motion The previous three steps contain an essential knowledge about the risk handling. So you have everything under your fingertips, you have tools (all risks are already in DHM for your project or opportunity, right? (smile)), and the last thing you need is to get the wheels running. The following steps can be a good starting point for doing this: Organize a Risk Review meeting with your key team members - be-weekly , for 30 mins at start. Spend one-third of the time on brainstorming for finding risks, the second third on assigning probability and impact scores, and the last third on finding responsible persons and handling strategies. Update your project plans with the risk handling steps (add tasks for mitigation, or buffers for acceptance, start the change process for avoidance) - and, of course, notify the team about the changes. Options are : Formal document update (SOW, PMP, Project Schedule Add as backlog items for mitigation and take out backlog items for avoidance/transfer. In this case, of course, you should align these changes with the PO. Provide a forum for the team members to warn you of new risks or changes to the existing ones (for example, add a question to the Sprint review/retrospective session). Review, Update and Action Risk Registry frequently (Weekly when updating status of your project in DHM (smile)) to see if something can be closed, or some parameters need to be updated. A risk can be closed if it surely won't happen, for example, because it has already happened. Risk probability or impact may change as we get more information during the project, and so on. Expose Top-3 or Top-5 suitable and actionable risks to the customer during next Project review meeting. The (star)WOW (star) effect will definitely be achieved by Monetary impact and suggested actions to Avoid /Reduce risk.

---

[source](https://kb.epam.com/display/EPMDMO/How+to+start+doing+real+risk+management+in+a+project "https://kb.epam.com/display/EPMDMO/How+to+start+doing+real+risk+management+in+a+project")