**Situation:** Describe the context within which you performed a job or faced a challenge at work. For example, perhaps you were working on a group project, or you had a conflict with a co-worker. This situation can be drawn from a work experience, a volunteer position, or any other relevant event. Be as specific as possible.  
**Task:** Next, describe your responsibility in that situation. Perhaps you had to help your group complete a project within a tight deadline, resolve a conflict with a co-worker, or hit a sales target.   **Action:** You then describe how you completed the task or endeavored to meet the challenge. Focus on what you did rather than what your team, boss, or co-worker did.

> Instead of saying, "We did XYZ," say, "I did XYZ.")

**Result:** Finally, explain the outcomes or results generated by the action taken. It may be helpful to emphasize what you accomplished or what you learned.

### Preparation:
1. **Make a list of the job qualifications.** First, make a list of the skills and/or experiences that are required for the job you're applying for. You can then match your qualifications to those listed in the posting.
2. **Create a list of examples.** Then, consider specific examples of occasions when you displayed those skills. For each example, name the situation, task, action, and result.
3. **Match your skills to the job.** Whatever examples you select, make sure they are as closely related to the job you’re interviewing for as possible.
4. **Prepare a response.** For each example, prepare a brief response:
    - Describe the situation (2-3 sentences).
    - Explain your task (1-2 sentences).
    - Describe the action you took (2-3 sentences).
    - Share your result (2-3 sentences).
---
see also: [How to Use the STAR Interview Response Method](https://www.thebalancemoney.com/what-is-the-star-interview-response-technique-2061629 "https://www.thebalancemoney.com/what-is-the-star-interview-response-technique-2061629")